Y. -W. Wen, Y. -L. Tang and C. -K. Ting, "Evolutionary Music Composition Using Tokenized Representation Based on Byte Pair Encoding," 2025 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), Hangzhou, China, 2025, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/CEC65147.2025.11042982.Abstract: Natural language processing (NLP) research has achieved remarkable advancement in recent decades. Language data and music data share several common features, enabling NLP techniques to be applied to music-related tasks, including music generation. One of the fundamental techniques in NLP is tokenization, which is designed to create more efficient representations of text. Inspired by the shared nature of language and music, this study proposes using tokenization algorithms to design a high-level representation that facilitates evolutionary music composition. Traditional evolutionary music composition systems typically employ an integer string to represent a melody. In contrast, the tokenized representation can encode more complex melodic information with a shorter chromosome than integer strings. A series of experiments were conducted to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed representation. The results demonstrate a significant improvement in both the expressiveness and efficiency of melody composition. keywords: {Deep learning;Collaboration;Evolutionary computation;Tokenization;Encoding;Multiple signal classification;Biological cells;Genetic algorithms;Convergence;Evolutionary music composition;tokenization;byte pair encoding;representation;genetic algorithm;symbolic music generation},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11042982&isnumber=11042912

L. Zhou, L. Yin and Y. Qian, "A Novel Compressive Compound Word Encoding and Independent Word Attention for Symbolic Music Generation," ICASSP 2025 - 2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Hyderabad, India, 2025, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/ICASSP49660.2025.10889355.Abstract: Symbolic music generation involves using symbolic encoding to represent music pieces as token sequences and using neural sequence models to create music by generating sequences of tokens. Symbolic encodings are primarily categorized into two types: independent word encoding and compound word encoding. Independent word encoding treats each token equally, where the model predicts one token at each timestep. Compound word encoding groups associated tokens and combines them into a super token, and places them in one timestep, where the model predicts multiple different tokens at each timestep. Previous works related to compound word encoding only use compressed representation constructed from super tokens for model learning without considering the independent tokens that consist of super tokens. To enable models to capture the dependencies between independent tokens in super tokens when using compound word encoding, we propose compressive compound word (CCP) encoding and independent word attention (IWA). The CCP reduces the number of ignore tokens in super tokens and timesteps required to encode one music piece. The IWA learns how the independent tokens in super tokens are organized. Experimental results demonstrate that IWA can improve the quality of generated music while CCP is more efficient when inference. keywords: {Predictive models;Signal processing;Encoding;Acoustics;Multiple signal classification;Compounds;Speech processing;Bars;symbolic music generation;symbolic encoding;neural sequence model;independent word;compound word;attention},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10889355&isnumber=10887541

Ş. -T. Ionică, R. Păroiu and Ş. Trăuşan-Matu, "Artificial intelligence-based system for music generation," 2025 25th International Conference on Control Systems and Computer Science (CSCS), Bucharest, Romania, 2025, pp. 641-646, doi: 10.1109/CSCS66924.2025.00100.Abstract: This paper explores deep learning techniques for symbolic music generation, experimenting with two different representations, pianoroll arrays and MIDI tokenization. Initially, Transformer-based models were applied to pianoroll data, but challenges related to data sparsity and an overall inability to capture musical structure were encountered. To address these issues, was adopted an event-based representation using the REMI+ tokenization method, enabling more effective processing of multi-instrument compositions. Experiments with a Transformer Decoder model trained on the Lakh MIDI dataset yielded more promising results in generating structured and coherent musical pieces than the ones using pianoroll data. Additionally, it was examined the impact of different sampling techniques, such as Top-K and temperature scaling, in order to find how it’s affecting the overall generation. These experiments demonstrate the compatibility of token-based representations in music generation when using Transformer-based models, providing insights into the effectiveness of different representations and modeling approaches. keywords: {Temperature;Event detection;Music;Focusing;Transformers;Harmonic analysis;Tokenization;Data models;Decoding;Temperature control;music generation;transformer models;symbolic representation;midi;pianoroll;remi tokenization;deep learning;multitrack music;top-k sampling;temperature sampling},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11181671&isnumber=11181578

W. Yao, C. L. P. Chen, Z. Zhang and T. Zhang, "AE-AMT: Attribute-Enhanced Affective Music Generation With Compound Word Representation," in IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 890-904, April 2025, doi: 10.1109/TCSS.2024.3486536.
Abstract: Affective music generation is a challenge for symbolic music generation. Existing methods face the problem that the perceived emotion of the generated music is not evident because music datasets containing emotional labels are relatively small in quantity and scale. To address this issue, an attribute-enhanced affective music transformer (AE-AMT) model is proposed to generate perceived affective music with attribute enhancement. In addition, a multiquantile-based attribute discretization (MQAD) strategy is designed, enabling the model to generate intensity-controllable affective music pieces. Furthermore, A replication-expanded compound representation of the control signals (RECR) method is designed for control signals to improve the controllability of the model. In objective experiments, the AE-AMT model demonstrated a 29.25% and 19.5% improvement in overall emotion accuracy, along with a 30% and 32% improvement in arousal accuracy on the datasets EMOPIA and VGMIDI. These improvements are achieved without significant difference in objective music quality, while also providing ample novelty and diversity compared to the current state-of-the-art approach. Moreover, subjective experiments revealed that the AE-AMT model outperformed comparison models, especially in low valence and arousal based on the Wilcoxon signed ranks test. Additionally, the soft variant model of AE-AMT exhibited a significant advantage in valence, low arousal, and overall music quality. These experiments showcase the AE-AMT model's ability to significantly enhance arousal performance and strike a balance between emotional intensity and musical quality through adaptable strategies.
keywords: {Music;Compounds;Transformers;Adaptation models;Computational modeling;Accuracy;Multiple signal classification;Generative adversarial networks;Emotion recognition;Mathematical models;Affective condition;musical attribute;symbolic music generation;transformer},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10750157&isnumber=10948539


N. Li, Q. Xiao and X. Yin, "Pentatonic-Net: Structure-Aware Symbolic Guqin Generation via Constrained Transformer Decoding," 2026 9th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Big Data (ICAIBD), Chengdu, China, 2026, pp. 422-425, doi: 10.1109/ICAIBD69640.2026.11637240.Abstract: Guqin music, a representative intangible cultural heritage of China, is characterized by its strict adherence to the Pentatonic Scale and sparse melodic structure. However, existing symbolic music generation models, mostly designed for Western 12-tone systems, often suffer from severe “modal hallucinations” and grammatical errors when applied to the low-resource Guqin domain. To address this, we propose Pentatonic-Net, a domain-specific generation framework. First, we introduce an enhanced REMI serialization scheme that efficiently represents Guqin scores by removing redundant Bar tokens and normalizing durations. Second, we design a Dual Inference Constraint mechanism, seamlessly integrating Pentatonic scale masks and Strict Syntax rules into the Transformer decoding process. We trained the model on an NVIDIA RTX 4090 and conducted stress tests using high-temperature sampling $(\mathrm{T}={2.5})$ with a generation length matching the real dataset distribution $(\mathrm{L} \approx {1114}$ tokens). Experimental results demonstrate that while the baseline model's scale consistency dropped to 67.39% due to high stochasticity over long sequences, Pentatonic-Net maintained 100% modal accuracy and strict grammatical correctness. These findings validate the robustness and artistic fidelity of our method for low-resource traditional music generation. keywords: {Modeling;Multiple signal classification;Music;Transformers;Sequences;Sequential analysis;Printing;Decoding;Equations;Conferences;Computational Ethnomusicology;Symbolic Music Generation;Transformer;Pentatonic Scale;Constrained Decoding},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11637240&isnumber=11637140

T. Inaba, K. Yoshii and E. Nakamura, "On the Importance of Time and Pitch Relativity for Transformer-Based Symbolic Music Generation," 2024 Asia Pacific Signal and Information Processing Association Annual Summit and Conference (APSIPA ASC), Macau, Macao, 2024, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/APSIPAASC63619.2025.10849230.Abstract: This paper describes experimental investigation of music representations to draw the full potential of the Transformer with the self-attention mechanism for symbolic music generation. To use sequence-to-sequence model like the Transformer originally proposed for natural language processing, one typically serializes a musical score into a sequence of event- or note-based tokens without concern for the impact on the quality of generated music. The semantic invariance of music with respect to the time and pitch shifts is attributed to the positional relativity of musical notes over the time-pitch plane in which beats and pitch classes are repeated at intervals of bars and octaves, respectively. We here hypothesize that the capability of the self-attention mechanism to learn the musically meaningful rhythm, melody, and harmony is limited because the relativity and cyclicity of time and pitch information are not explicitly represented in the token sequence. To solve this problem, we propose a cyclicity-aware relative time and pitch encoding unique to music for the attention mechanism. Comprehensive evaluation using the POP909 dataset demonstrated that the proposed Transformer works better with event- or note-based score tokenization1. keywords: {Attention mechanisms;Semantics;Asia;Information processing;Transformers;Rhythm;Encoding;Natural language processing;Multiple signal classification;Bars},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10849230&isnumber=10848533

D. Gangal and Y. Kadam, "Unleashing the Melodic Potential: Music Generation with Char RNNs," 2023 2nd International Conference on Futuristic Technologies (INCOFT), Belagavi, Karnataka, India, 2023, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/INCOFT60753.2023.10425396.Abstract: Recently, the use of ABC notation in music composition employing recurrent neural networks (RNNs) has gained popularity. As a possible tool for ABC-based music creation, our work investigates char RNN models. Due to its simple and clear representation of musical elements, the ABC notation style is used for training RNN models. This study's main objective is to assess the effectiveness and creativity of Character RNN models for generating music. The technical facets of model implementation are examined in this paper, including network design, training approaches, and text preprocessing methods particular to ABC notation. Furthermore, the model's compositions are evaluated for overall coherence, melodic and rhythmic patterns and harmonic progressions. With the aid of this study, we seek to acquire a deeper grasp of the musical creativity potential of Character RNN models and their capability to generate music. keywords: {Training;Video games;Recurrent neural networks;Music;Training data;Data models;Creativity;Music Generation;Char Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN);ABC Notation},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10425396&isnumber=10424987

S. Lin, M. Zukerman and H. Yan, "Dance to Music Generation Based on Residual Vector Quantization," 2025 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (BigData), Macau, China, 2025, pp. 5175-5178, doi: 10.1109/BigData66926.2025.11402456.Abstract: Music, a traditional element in human entertainment, has been extensively studied. We propose a novel method for music generation from human dance motions. We employ Residual Vector Quantization (RVQ) for music feature tokenization, using RVQ indices as the music representation, which reduces the learning complexity. A cross-modal generation model integrating LSTM and attention mechanisms is designed to generate RVQ codebook indices from dance motions. Finally, the indices can be converted back to music waveforms through a music decoder. Experimental results demonstrate the feasibility of generating coherent music that aligns with dance dynamics, providing a new approach for cross-modal entertainment content creation. keywords: {Humanities;Attention mechanisms;Vector quantization;Dynamics;Entertainment industry;Big Data;Tokenization;Decoding;Complexity theory;Long short term memory;Background music generation;Residual vector quantization;Dance-Driven Music},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11402456&isnumber=11400712

Z. Chen, "Steerable Rhythmic Complexity in Autoregressive Music Generation: A Bar-Level Conditional Transformer Approach," 2026 IEEE 2nd International Conference on Electronics, Energy Systems and Power Engineering (EESPE), Shenyang, China, 2026, pp. 1226-1230, doi: 10.1109/EESPE68405.2026.11648903.Abstract: Controllable music generation usually deals with the deep coupling of latent features, in which modulating rhythmic complexity tends to destroy harmonic stability. The paper proposes a lightweight, highly accurate conditioning mechanism based on the REMI+ prefix syntax to control rhythmic density in autoregressive generation. As a concrete implementation, the paper introduces a micro-Transformer architecture with 4 layers, 8 heads, and applies a 50-epoch deep-training strategy on a high-purity dataset consisting of 349 J. S. Bach four-part chorales, thereby enabling an effective and clean isolation of the self-attention mechanism's response to explicitly injected complexity tags from Level_1 to Level_10. As a result, during evaluation, 1,000 multi-bar MIDI sequences were synthesized via nucleus sampling (top_p = 0.9) while carefully preserving micro-level diversity. Quantitative results clearly and convincingly establish a strong positive linear correlation (Pearson r = 0.893) between the target complexity tokens and the actual note density of the outputs, therefore directly confirming macro-level generative robustness. More importantly, although the physical note density multiplies across the control tiers, the pitch class Shannon entropy remains tightly bounded between 3.5 and 4.5 bits. Hence, the REMI+ framework has achieved the desired physical-level decoupling of rhythmic complexity and harmonic stability. Even better, the model increases auditory complexity via controlled, contrapuntally meaningful variations rather than random noise, making it a truly interpretable and robust paradigm for conditionally steerable symbolic music generation. keywords: {Modeling;Complexity theory;Music;Multiple signal classification;Transformers;Bars;Training;Sequences;Sequential analysis;Printing;Controllable Music Generation;Micro-Transformer;Feature Decoupling;REMI+ Representation;Rhythmic Complexity},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11648903&isnumber=11648216

Z. Kun, S. R. A. L. Sindiramutty, N. H. B. Bakar, N. Jhanjhi and F. Ashfaq, "Music Generation and Key Standardization Using LSTM Model," 2025 International Conference on Emerging Trends in Networks and Computer Communications (ETNCC), Windhoek, Namibia, 2025, pp. 695-700, doi: 10.1109/ETNCC66224.2025.11299766.Abstract: Music is one of the most popular and emotionally powerful art forms, valued for entertainment, therapy, and even medical applications such as anxiety treatment. Advances in computer-assisted music creation, especially deep learning, have made automated music generation a significant research focus. This research develops a system that combines Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) networks, attention mechanisms, and temperature sampling to produce music that is both emotionally rich and structurally coherent. LSTM networks handle musical sequences and long-range dependencies, while attention mechanisms highlight important parts of the sequence. Temperature sampling introduces controlled randomness to enhance diversity. The system processes MIDI data using the Octuple representation, enabling simultaneous handling of pitch, velocity, duration, and other musical attributes for optimal generation. The workflow involves preparing music datasets, analyzing MIDI files, and producing new compositions. Experiments showed that the Transformer model achieved the highest AUC (0.89) and lowest perplexity (45.89), while the LSTM + Attention model offered more stable training and efficient generation, confirming the benefits of dataset standardization to $\mathbf{C}$ major. keywords: {Training;Deep learning;Attention mechanisms;Computational modeling;Music;Medical treatment;Standardization;Transformers;Temperature control;Long short term memory;Deep Learning;Music Generation;Key Standardization;Long Short Term Memory Networks},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11299766&isnumber=11299555

W. Wang, X. Li, C. Jin, D. Lu, Q. Zhou and Y. Tie, "CPS: Full-Song and Style-Conditioned Music Generation with Linear Transformer," 2022 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo Workshops (ICMEW), Taipei City, Taiwan, 2022, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/ICMEW56448.2022.9859286.Abstract: Many deep music generation algorithms have recently been able to produce good-sounding music, but there have been few studies on controlled generation. In this process, the human sense of participation is usually very weak, and it is difficult to integrate one’s own musical motivation into the creation. In this study, we will introduce CPS (Compound word with style), a model that can specify a target style and generate a complete musical composition from scratch. We first added the genre meta-information to the music representation and distinguished it from other low-level music representations, thus strengthening the influence of the control signal. We modeled with the linear transformer, while used an adaptive strategy with different settings for different types of music tokens to reduce the probability of disharmonic music. The experiments show that, when compared to the baseline model, our model performs better in terms of basic music metrics as well as metrics for evaluating controlled ability. keywords: {Measurement;Adaptation models;Conferences;Music;Transformers;Multiple signal classification;Compounds;music generation;style-conditioned;music representation},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9859286&isnumber=9859265

J. Huang et al., "MuseTok: Symbolic Music Tokenization for Generation and Semantic Understanding," ICASSP 2026 - 2026 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Barcelona, Spain, 2026, pp. 3956-3960, doi: 10.1109/ICASSP55912.2026.11463020.Abstract: Discrete representation learning has shown promising results across various domains, including generation and understanding in image, speech and language. Inspired by these advances, we propose MuseTok, a tokenization method for symbolic music, and investigate its effectiveness in both music generation and understanding tasks. MuseTok employs the residual vector quantized-variational autoencoder (RQ-VAE) on bar-wise music segments within a Transformer-based encoder-decoder framework, producing music codes that achieve high-fidelity music reconstruction and accurate understanding of music theory. For comprehensive evaluation, we apply MuseTok to music generation and semantic understanding tasks, including melody extraction, chord recognition, and emotion recognition. Models incorporating MuseTok outperform previous representation learning baselines in semantic understanding while maintaining comparable performance in content generation. Furthermore, qualitative analyses on MuseTok codes, using ground-truth categories and synthetic datasets, reveal that MuseTok effectively captures underlying musical concepts from large music collections. keywords: {Activity recognition;Human activity recognition;Low earth orbit satellites;Recommender systems;Information filtering;Protocols;HTTP;Storage area networks;Computer networks;Learning (artificial intelligence);Representation Learning;Music Tokenization;Symbolic Music Generation;Music Understanding},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11463020&isnumber=11460314

V. B. Kumar and M. Kathiravan, "Automatic music generation using RNN," 2023 International Conference on Research Methodologies in Knowledge Management, Artificial Intelligence and Telecommunication Engineering (RMKMATE), Chennai, India, 2023, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/RMKMATE59243.2023.10369221.Abstract: this paper explains the development of music automatically. Deep learning is employed in order to do this. In the shape of an ABC note sequence, melody is created. Using vast amounts of data for music is presently feasible. mostly for the creation of music utilizing deep learning For modeling, it utilize LSTM or GRU. In terms of music creation, it is comparable to sequence creation. Since LSTM creates sequences most effectively, using it is recommended. Subjective evaluation is carried out by people with diverse backgrounds, including classical music interest, performance, composer, and digital composer. The results reveal that the double stacked layer LSTM model outperforms the composer pattern in music, with a 70% recall score. Furthermore, subjective evaluation indicates that the created music is listenable and intriguing, with a score of 6.85 out of 10 on double LSTM stacked layer. keywords: {Deep learning;Recurrent neural networks;Shape;Music;Knowledge management;Communications technology;Artificial intelligence;Char-Recurrent neural networks;Long short term memory;ABC Notation;Flask;Deep learning;Gate recurrent unit},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10369221&isnumber=10368609

A. Aydıngün et al., "Turkish Music Generation using Deep Learning," 2020 28th Signal Processing and Communications Applications Conference (SIU), Gaziantep, Turkey, 2020, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/SIU49456.2020.9302283.Abstract: In this work, a new model is introduced for Turkish song generation using deep learning. It will be the first work on Turkish song generation that makes use of Recurrent Neural Networks to generate the lyrics automatically along with a language model, where the melody is also generated by a neural language model analogously, and then the singing synthesis is performed by combining the lyrics with the melody. It will be the first work on Turkish song generation. keywords: {Deep learning;Electronics packaging;Cognition;Tokenization;Recurrent neural networks;Reactive power;Publishing;music composition;language model;deep learning;recurrent neural networks},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9302283&isnumber=9302026

Y. Liao, W. Yue, Y. Jian, Z. Wang, Y. Gao and C. Lu, "MICW: A Multi-Instrument Music Generation Model Based on the Improved Compound Word," 2022 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo Workshops (ICMEW), Taipei City, Taiwan, 2022, pp. 1-10, doi: 10.1109/ICMEW56448.2022.9859531.Abstract: In this work, we address the task of multi-instrument music generation. Notably, along with the development of artificial neural networks, deep learning has become a leading technique to accelerate the automatic music generation and is featured in many previous papers like MuseGan[1], MusicBert[2], and PopMAG[3]. However, seldom of them implement a well-designed representation of multi-instrumental music, and no model perfectly introduces a prior knowledge of music theory. In this paper, we leverage the Compound Word[4] and R-drop[5] method to work on multi-instrument music generation tasks. Objective and subjective evaluations show that the generated music has cost less training time, and achieved prominent music quality. keywords: {Training;Deep learning;Costs;Conferences;Artificial neural networks;Compounds;Task analysis;Multi-Instrument;R-Drop},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9859531&isnumber=9859265

M. Zhou, X. Li, F. Yu and W. Li, "EMelodyGen: Emotion-Conditioned Melody Generation in ABC Notation with the Musical Feature Template," 2025 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo Workshops (ICMEW), Nantes, France, 2025, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/ICMEW68306.2025.11152266.Abstract: The EMelodyGen system focuses on emotional melody generation in ABC notation controlled by the musical feature template. Owing to the scarcity of well-structured and emotionally labeled sheet music, we designed a template for controlling emotional melody generation by statistical correlations between musical features and emotion labels derived from small-scale emotional symbolic music datasets and music psychology conclusions. We then automatically annotated a large, well-structured sheet music collection with rough emotional labels by the template, converted them into ABC notation, and reduced label imbalance by data augmentation, resulting in a dataset named Rough4Q. Our system backbone pre-trained on Rough4Q can achieve up to 99% music21 parsing rate and melodies generated by our template can lead to a 91% alignment on emotional expressions in blind listening tests. Ablation studies further validated the effectiveness of the feature controls in the template. Available code and demos are at https://github.com/monetjoe/EMelodyGen. keywords: {Correlation;Codes;Conferences;Confusion matrices;Music;Psychology;Data augmentation;Complexity theory;Reliability;Melody generation;controllable music generation;ABC notation;emotional condition},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11152266&isnumber=11152034

S. Kunasorn, N. Thaikerd, P. Kantavat and Y. Vaneesorn, "A Retrieval-Augmented LLM Framework for Symbolic Composition of Traditional Thai Music," 2025 29th International Computer Science and Engineering Conference (ICSEC), Chiang Mai, Thailand, 2025, pp. 465-471, doi: 10.1109/ICSEC67360.2025.11298073.Abstract: This paper presents a symbolic music generation framework for traditional Thai music that integrates retrieval-augmented generation, multi-agent orchestration, and culturally informed prompting within an ABC-notation workflow. Unlike prior work focused mainly on Western repertoires, the proposed approach combines curated song collections, theoretical knowledge, and rubric-guided evaluation to capture distinctive stylistic features of Thai music. Comparative experiments against a single-agent baseline show stronger alignment with authentic Thai rhythm, particularly in Na Thap cycles, while pitch modeling and cadential resolution remain more challenging. These results highlight the effectiveness of culturally grounded retrieval and evaluation mechanisms in extending symbolic music generation to underexplored musical traditions, contributing to ongoing efforts in digital preservation and culturally aware music generation. keywords: {Grounding;Large language models;Retrieval augmented generation;Process control;Organizations;Rhythm;Harmonic analysis;Cultural differences;Iterative methods;Digital preservation;Symbolic music generation;Large language models (LLMs);Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG);Multi-agent orchestration;Traditional Thai music},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11298073&isnumber=11297984

R. K. Chaturvedi and N. A. Shelke, "Music generation using hybrid deep neural model," 2024 Intelligent Systems and Machine Learning Conference (ISML), Hyderabad, India, 2024, pp. 221-226, doi: 10.1109/ISML60050.2024.11007294.Abstract: Music theory is at the core of music. Whenever artists create any new songs it takes a long time to think and generate them and sometimes the music still comes out bad. The point of music generation using AI is that previous successful and melodious music can be used to generate new and inspired music by it. And with the help of this professional musicians can create better music faster. The paper is about building a model that creates music automatically using datasets containing music from different artists and genres. It learns the pattern of music in the datasets and generate new music inspired from those. For this, we are utilizing the knowledge of basic music representation like the ABC notation and midi format. We are implementing hybrid deep learning neural model using Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and Long short-term memory (LSTM). keywords: {Deep learning;Recurrent neural networks;Buildings;Music;Hybrid power systems;Intelligent systems;Long short term memory;AI;LSTM;RNN;music;melodious},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11007294&isnumber=11007332

Q. -V. Nguyen et al., "GENPIA: A Genre-Conditioned Piano Music Generation System," 2024 IEEE 5th International Symposium on the Internet of Sounds (IS2), Erlangen, Germany, 2024, pp. 1-10, doi: 10.1109/IS262782.2024.10704094.Abstract: With the demand for music continuing to grow as people seek variety and personal resonance, many works focus on music generation. In this study, we propose GENPIA, a genre-conditioned piano music generation system. The system encompasses Anime, R&B, Jazz, and Classical music genres. To build our system, we collect and label audio data of various genres for the specific objective of our research. REMI audio representation with genre information extension is applied during data pre-processing to present the audio data with a better data structure. Transformer-XL is implemented as the model to learn knowledge about the extended audio representation and generate the desired output audio. An external dataset, called Ailabs. tw lK7, is utilized for pre-training purposes. The results obtained from a listening questionnaire show that GENPIA can generate better piano pieces conditioned on different genres compared to the prior state-of-the-art work. keywords: {Measurement;Surveys;Music;Transformers;Data structures;Resonance;Internet;Labeling;GENPIA;Piano music generation;Genre- condition;Transfromer-XL},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10704094&isnumber=10704076

R. Guo and D. Herremans, "An Exploration of Controllability in Symbolic Music Infilling," in IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 54873-54891, 2025, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3554648.
Abstract: This study uses a transformer model to enhance the controllability of generative symbolic music models, specifically related to the infilling task. We introduce a novel Symbolic Music representation with Explicit Rest notation (SMER) encoding incorporating five basic duration types and explicit rest note tokens similar to standard music notation. We compare this approach with another event-based symbolic music encoding called “REMI” (REvamped MIDI-derived events) regarding controllability over bar-level tension and track-level texture, which refers to how musical elements such as melody and harmony are combined in a musical composition. The SMER encoding is compared with another controllable infilling model, Multi-Track Music Machine (MMM), for track-level density controllability. The findings confirm that the proposed SMER demonstrates superior controllability and generates music stylistically more similar to the original music than that generated by MMM. We propose strategies to further enhance track-level texture control by training two models, controlling each bar’s texture (SMER BAR), and predicting each bar’s texture after each bar’s generation (SMER Pre). Those two models with bar-level texture control effectively increase track-level texture control. To explore the interaction of the controllability of different controls, we thoroughly analyzed the controllability of different types and levels of texture controls. Finally, we implemented an interactive interface to facilitate interactive music composition with AI to help bridge the gap between the AI model and musicians.
keywords: {Music;Bars;Controllability;Encoding;Artificial intelligence;Predictive models;Transformers;Target tracking;Multiple signal classification;Electronic mail;Symbolic music generation;conditional sequence generation;music encodings;interactions of controls},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10938538&isnumber=10820123


M. A. Pangestu and S. Suyanto, "Generating Music with Emotion Using Transformer," 2021 International Conference on Computer Science and Engineering (IC2SE), Padang, Indonesia, 2021, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/IC2SE52832.2021.9791928.Abstract: The Transformer model has gained popularity because of its capabilities for solving multiple tasks. One of them is automatic music generation. Many studies have proven that this model can generate music with a consistent structure, but the pieces that are generated still lack emotion in it. In this paper, we extend Transformer-based model capabilities to generate music with controllable emotion. The emotion is divided into three categories: negative, neutral, and positive. We train the model using 120 MIDI files from our new piano datasets. The dataset has been labeled based on their emotion. The labeling is done manually by hearing. The total MIDI files available in the dataset is 210 but we filter it so that only 120 remains. We also add a new token to represent emotion on REvamped MIDI-derived event (REMI). The experimental results show that human subject agreed that Transformer-XL model using REMI and emotion token is able to generate emotion-based music. We also compare our generated pieces with other datasets. The result show that the majority of respondents prefer pieces that are generated using our datasets. keywords: {Training;Computer science;Computational modeling;Music;Auditory system;Transformers;Data models;music generation;controllable music generation;transformer},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9791928&isnumber=9791467

J. Chen, X. Tang, T. Xie, J. Wang, W. Dong and B. Shi, "MusicMamba: A Dual-Feature Modeling Approach for Generating Chinese Traditional Music with Modal Precision," ICASSP 2025 - 2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Hyderabad, India, 2025, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/ICASSP49660.2025.10890633.Abstract: In recent years, deep learning has advanced the MIDI domain, solidifying music generation as a key application of artificial intelligence. However, most research focuses on Western music, facing challenges in generating Chinese traditional melodies, particularly in capturing modal characteristics and emotional expression. To address this, we propose the Dual-Feature Modeling Module, which integrates the long-range modeling of the Mamba Block with the global structure capturing of the Transformer Block. Additionally, we introduce the Bidirectional Mamba Fusion Layer, which integrates local details and global structures through bidirectional scanning, enhancing sequence modeling. Building on this, we propose the REMI-M representation to better capture and generate modal information in melodies. To support this, we developed FolkDB, a high-quality Chinese traditional music dataset covering over 11 hours of music. Experimental results show our architecture excels in generating melodies with Chinese traditional music characteristics, offering a new solution for music generation. keywords: {Deep learning;Instruments;Architecture;Buildings;Signal processing;Transformers;Acoustics;Multiple signal classification;Speech processing;Artificial intelligence;Music generation;music information retrieval;neural networks;deep learning;machine learning},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10890633&isnumber=10887541

T. -Y. Chen and Y. -J. Joung, "Etude: Piano Cover Generation with a Three-Stage Approach — Extract, Structuralize, and Decode," ICASSP 2026 - 2026 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Barcelona, Spain, 2026, pp. 5426-5430, doi: 10.1109/ICASSP55912.2026.11460519.Abstract: Piano cover generation aims to automatically transform a pop song into a piano arrangement. While numerous deep learning approaches have been proposed, existing models often fail to maintain structural consistency with the original song, likely due to the absence of beat-aware mechanisms or the difficulty of modeling complex rhythmic patterns. Rhythmic information is crucial, as it defines structural similarity (e.g., tempo, BPM) and directly impacts the overall quality of the generated music. In this paper, we introduce Etude, a three-stage architecture consisting of Extract, strucTUralize, and DEcode stages. By pre-extracting rhythmic information and applying a novel, simplified REMI-based tokenization, our model produces covers that preserve proper song structure, enhance fluency and musical dynamics, and support highly controllable generation through style injection. Subjective evaluations with human listeners show that Etude substantially outperforms prior models, achieving a quality level comparable to that of human composers. keywords: {Earth Observing System;Artificial satellites;Filtering;Filters;Amplitude shift keying;Protocols;Amplitude modulation;HTTP;Radio access networks;Regional area networks;Automatic Piano Cover Generation;Music Generation;Music Information Retrieval;Automatic Music Transcription},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11460519&isnumber=11460314

M. Kaliakatsos-Papakostas, D. Makris, K. Soiledis, K. -T. Tsamis, V. Katsouros and E. Cambouropoulos, "Pay (Cross) Attention to the Melody: Curriculum Masking for Single-Encoder Melodic Harmonization," 2025 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (BigData), Macau, China, 2025, pp. 5007-5015, doi: 10.1109/BigData66926.2025.11401629.Abstract: Melodic harmonization, the task of generating harmonic accompaniments for a given melody, remains a central challenge in computational music generation. Recent single encoder transformer approaches have framed harmonization as a masked sequence modeling problem, but existing training curricula inspired by discrete diffusion often result in weak (“cross”) attention between melody and harmony. This leads to limited exploitation of melodic cues, particularly in out-of-domain contexts. In this work, we introduce a training curriculum, FF (full-to-full), which keeps all harmony tokens masked for several training steps before progressively unmasking entire sequences during training to strengthen melody-harmony interactions. We systematically evaluate this approach against prior curricula across multiple experimental axes, including temporal quantization (quarter vs. sixteenth note), bar-level vs. time-signature conditioning, melody representation (full range vs. pitch class), and inference-time unmasking strategies. Models are trained on the HookTheory dataset and evaluated both in-domain and on a curated collection of jazz standards, using a comprehensive set of metrics that assess chord progression structure, harmony-melody alignment, and rhythmic coherence. Results demonstrate that the proposed FF curriculum consistently outperforms baselines in nearly all metrics, with particularly strong gains in out-of-domain evaluations where harmonic adaptability to novel melodic queues is crucial. We further find that quarter-note quantization, inter-twining of bar tokens, and pitch-class melody representations are advantageous in the FF setting. Our findings highlight the importance of training curricula in enabling effective melody conditioning and suggest that full-to-full unmasking offers a robust strategy for single encoder harmonization. keywords: {Training;Measurement;Quantization (signal);Protocols;Computer architecture;Harmonic analysis;Transformers;Tokenization;Mathematical models;Bars;Melodic Harmonization;Single-Encoder Architectures;Curriculum Learning;Masking Strategies},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11401629&isnumber=11400712

J. S. Karlapalam, P. Joshi, R. Khuba, S. Bhattacharya and S. Lalitha, "An Ethical Framework for Advancing Music Composition through Generative Model," 2024 15th International Conference on Computing Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT), Kamand, India, 2024, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/ICCCNT61001.2024.10724645.Abstract: Navigating the intersection of artificial intelligence and music, this work delves into the application of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) for jazz music composition. The GAN architecture, comprising a Generator and a Discriminator, is harnessed to produce original music from a jazz-specific Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI) dataset. The Generator learns intricate patterns within the MIDI note rang, incorporating controlled randomness through noise, The MIDI to audio conversion is facilitated by Timidity, while pre-processing techniques include Interquartile range (IQR), box plots and cumulative distribution plots which contribute to refining the generated samples. This is done to analyze the AI capacity in the domain of music generation. It was observed after 15 epoch iterations that the accuracy turned out to be 92 percent, while still being prone to hyperparameter tuning. This process of hyperparameter tuning was carried out after multiple trial and errors to achieve this accuracy. This works provides a significant potential in the field for future research of AI generated music. keywords: {Ethics;Accuracy;Navigation;Musical instrument digital interfaces;Noise;Refining;Generative adversarial networks;Generators;Artificial intelligence;Tuning;Discriminator;Generator;Interquartile range (IQR);Signal to Noise ratio (SNR);Tokenization},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10724645&isnumber=10723316

J. Jung et al., "U-MusT: A Unified Framework for Cross-Modal Translation of Score Images, Symbolic Music, and Performance Audio," in IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing, vol. 34, pp. 1876-1891, 2026, doi: 10.1109/TASLPRO.2025.3648794.
Abstract: Music exists in various modalities, such as score images, symbolic scores, MIDI, and audio. Translations between such modalities are established as core tasks of music information retrieval, such as automatic music transcription (audio-to-MIDI) and optical music recognition (score image to symbolic score). However, most past work on multimodal translation utilizes specialized models trained for each translation task. In this paper, we propose a unified framework based on a common tokenization strategy. We use dedicated separate models for the Image-to-Audio and Audio-to-Image directions, sharing an identical encoder-decoder architecture to handle each task within a coherent framework. Two key factors make this unified approach viable: a new large-scale dataset, and the tokenization of each modality. Firstly, we propose a new dataset that consists of more than 1,300 hours of paired audio-score image data collected from YouTube videos, which is an order of magnitude larger than any existing music modal translation datasets. Secondly, our unified tokenization framework discretizes score images, audio, MIDI, and MusicXML into a sequence of tokens, enabling standard encoder–decoder Transformers to tackle multiple cross-modal translation as one coherent sequence-to-sequence task. Experimental results confirm that our unified framework improves upon single-task baselines in several key areas, notably reducing the symbol error rate for optical music recognition from 24.58% to a state-of-the-art 13.67%, while also seeing substantial improvements across the other translation tasks. Notably, our approach achieves the first musically-coherent score-image-conditioned audio generation, marking a significant breakthrough in cross-modal music generation.
keywords: {Translation;Music;Optical imaging;Training;Predictive models;Multitasking;Image recognition;Web sites;Videos;Video on demand;Cross-modal music translation;multi-task learning;optical music recognition;automatic music transcription;image-to-audio;MIDI-to-audio;music information retrieval;YouTube score video dataset},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11316398&isnumber=11302005


Y. Qian et al., "MusicAOG: An Energy-Based Model for Learning and Sampling a Hierarchical Representation of Symbolic Music," in IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 873-889, April 2025, doi: 10.1109/TCSS.2024.3521445.
Abstract: In addressing the challenge of interpretability and generalizability of artificial music intelligence, this article introduces a novel symbolic representation that amalgamates both explicit and implicit musical information across diverse traditions and granularities. Utilizing a hierarchical and-or graph representation, the model employs nodes and edges to encapsulate a broad spectrum of musical elements, including structures, textures, rhythms, and harmonies. This hierarchical approach expands the representability across various scales of music. This representation serves as the foundation for an energy-based model, uniquely tailored to learn musical concepts through a flexible algorithm framework relying on the minimax entropy principle. Utilizing an adapted Metropolis–Hastings sampling technique, the model enables fine-grained control over music generation. Through a comprehensive empirical evaluation, this novel approach demonstrates significant improvements in interpretability and controllability compared to existing methodologies. This study marks a substantial contribution to the fields of music analysis, composition, and computational musicology.
keywords: {Music;Grammar;Adaptation models;Synchronization;Production;Rhythm;Process control;Natural languages;Entropy;Electronic mail;Artificial music intelligence;computational musicology;representation learning},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10907865&isnumber=10948539


